---
title: Next level dotfiles with Ansible
date: 2019-10-11
---

In the life of every linux enthusiast comes the point, where he has a lot of
individual configuration build up and wants to migrate these settings over to
another machine as seamlessly as possible. At this point a whole philosophy of
how to do this is coming into play. Today this philosophy is bundled under the
name: _dotfiles_. Historically dotfiles are the config files, which lie
in your home directory. Because they try to be invisible to the user, they start
with a dot (which is the linux convention for invisible files).

I started the classical approach like many others and kept [a git
repository](https://github.com/snowiow/dotfiles) with all the important dotfiles
I want to share between my machines. A shell script lies in the root directory,
which symlinks everything inside the _dotfiles_ sub directory to the _home_
directory. In the beginning this was great. All my important applications, like
vim, were configured after executing the shell script. From that point on I
could change my configuration files, which were synced back to the git
repository. When I was at a new consistent state, which I wanted to share, I
pushed it to the repository. Afterwards I could pull the changes onto my other
machines. My main concern with this approach arised when more and more
application implemented the
[xdg-user-dir](https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/xdg-user-dirs/). Now
most of the dotfiles were located in my _.config_ directory and the symlink
linked to _~/.config_ itself. Now I had to differentiate a lot between files I
want to track and those I don’t, before every commit. Long story short: I found
a new and better approach, which I want to present here:
[Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/).

You might think now: “Ansible? Really? That’s total overkill for syncing
dotfiles!” That’s true, but on the other hand it’s much more than just for
syncing my dotfiles. But first of all a small introduction for everyone, who
never heard about Ansible before: Ansible is a project written in Python, which
helps you create reproducible systems. The normal use case for Ansible is as a
configuration manager. Ansible projects mostly consist of YAML files, in which
you define a want to state of a system. Then you apply it to a system and
Ansible syncs everything between the system and the defined state of your YAML
files. So in many ways it can be compared to Terraform, which I talked a lot
about in my previous posts. But I see Ansible on a level lower than
Terraform. While Terraform is about the big picture representing your whole
infrastructure, consisting of many virtual Servers and other cloud services,
Ansible takes care about each and every system in this infrastructure. So it is
more like docker, but you install and configure stuff on the system itself. Ok,
this should be enough of an intro to Ansible. Also because we don't use it in
it's intended way here...

Let’s dive into my totally over engineered dotfiles!

# Getting a base structure built up

Normally you provision other systems from one operator system, mostly via SSH.
But we want to use Ansible on the current system. Sure it would also be cool,
to provision a new system from some sort of main machine, but in reality it was
never necessary for me. So the first thing we do, is to tell Ansible, we want to
execute everything on localhost. Therefore we create a
[_hosts_](https://github.com/snowiow/snow/blob/master/hosts) file in our new
dotfiles directory, with the following line of code:

```
[local]
localhost ansible_connection=local
```

This will tell Ansible which hosts to provision.

Now we need to talk about two important concepts of Ansible. The first one are
playbooks. Playbooks are Ansible’s infrastructure as code so to say. They
demonstrate the want to be state of a system and are described in a descriptive
manner in form of YAML files. The Ansible docs describe playbooks as the
instruction manual for configuration, deployment and orchestration.

The second important concept are roles. Ansible roles are a form of structuring
your playbooks and make them reproducible. We mainly use roles to structure our
dotfiles and to keep different application configurations separated. For example
I reuse my roles in different forms for my Linux and OSX machine, because the
installation process is different, but the symlinking of the dotfiles is the
same. Roles dictate a special directory structure. This way Ansible is able to
magically run those roles without setting too much manually. I will go into more
detail, when we create our first role. All roles are located in the [roles sub
directory](https://github.com/snowiow/snow/tree/master/roles).

# Create your first role
As an example we install neovim, but this can be any software you want to always
have installed. For this, we create a `nvim` sub directory in the `roles`
directory. In the `nvim` sub directory we create a `tasks` and `files`
directory. The current directory structure should look like this:

<img src="/images/ansible_directory_structure_1.png" alt="Ansible Directory Structure" title="Ansible Directory Structure" />

In the _tasks_ directory we create a file called _main.yml_. This file is the
starting point of a role and will be called automatically, similar as the main
function in various programming languages. Here we add the following
instruction:

```yaml
- name: install neovim on linux
  package:
    name:
      - neovim
      - python-pynvim
    state: present
  become: yes
```

Basically everything in playbooks is defined in these blocks. They follow a
common structure starting with an optional name, which is printed during
execution. This is helpful to follow what's currently done. Then the following
key specifies a module, which does some sort of operation. There are many
prebuild
[modules](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/list_of_all_modules.html),
which are shipped with Ansible. Of course you can also [write your own
module](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/dev_guide/developing_modules_general.html),
but the amount of choice is so overwhelming, that I never ran into this
situation.

The [package
module](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/package_module.html)
does the operation of downloading a package with your systems package manager
for example. If you execute this on an Arch Linux machine, a package is
downloaded via Pacman. If you execute this on Mac OSX, homebrew is used. There
are also the respective modules for
[Pacman](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/pacman_module.html)
and
[homebrew](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/homebrew_module.html),
if you already know that you execute this playbook on this specific OS only.

Every module has some mandatory and optional parameters. See the [package
module](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/package_module.html#parameters)
for example. These are set inside of the _package_ block. The first parameter
_name_ takes one or more names of packages. The second parameter _state_ tells
if the packages defined under _name_ should be present or absent. Also there is
an optional parameter _use_, where you can define which package manager to use.
In our example we omit this parameter, which results in Ansible searching for
the correct one to use on the current system.

Now you can also see why I was talking about the declarative nature of Ansible.
We don't tell Ansible what and how something needs to be done. We just tell
what we want to have. We want to have neovim and the python package neovim
present on the system. Ansible takes care about the rest. In a normal shell
script for example, we would need to explicitly tell, with which package manager
we want to download a specific package and only if this package isn't already
installed. Otherwise do nothing.

The last part of this snippet (_become: yes_) says that this block should be
executed as root. This is outside of the package block, because it's not
specific to this module, but can be appended to every block. In this case we
need to be root, because normally only root users are able to install new
software via the package manager.

Now let's execute this role. First we need a new YAML file, which we
specifically execute by Ansible. In this file we also define the roles, which
should be executed. Let's create a file called _roles.yml_ in the root directory
with the following content:

```yaml
- name: Setup local environment
  hosts: localhost
  roles:
    - nvim
```

As always we give this block a name and set the desired host. This represents
the key of the hosts init file, we defined in the beginning. Ansible will take
the stuff under that key and execute the roles, which are defined afterwards,
for this host.

Now we execute the Ansible playbook script via:

```sh
ansible-playbook --ask-become-pass -i hosts roles.yml
```

The _--ask-become-pass_ flag needs to be given, because we have at least one
block, which needs root access. This causes Ansible to ask for your password in
the beginning. Ansible saves this password during execution and uses it every
time it finds the `become: yes` block. The _-i_ flag specifies the inventory,
where the hosts are defined. In our case we pass the _hosts_ file. As the main
argument we pass Ansible the _roles.yml_, which then executes the roles defined
in that file. This should give you something like this output (if you already
have those packages installed) or a slightly different output, because Ansbible
will install them now. Also this should be executable by every Linux
distribution as long as the package names match.

<img src="/images/ansible_output_1.png" alt="Ansible Output" title="Ansible Output" />

As a quality of live addition I would create a shell script called
[install](https://github.com/snowiow/snow/blob/master/install) or something,
which itself executes the _ansible-playbook_ command above. The command itself
is very daunting to type over and over again. I also use the shell script for
executing the _ansible-playbook_ with different flags on different systems and
pass environment variables, which are then used by Ansible.

# Symlink nvim dotfiles

Now we want to symlink some dotfiles for neovim. In this example we will only
symlink the _init.vim_ file. First place your _init.vim_ into the _files_
directory, which we created earlier in the nvim role directory. Then we add a
new block to the _main.yml_ in the nvim role:

```yaml
- name: symlink init.vim
  file:
    src: "{{ ansible_env.PWD }}/roles/nvim/files/init.vim"
    path: "~/.config/nvim/init.vim"
    state: link
```

Because you now understand Ansible playbooks, you can easily read the above
block. First we have a name again, which tells us to symlink the init.vim file.
Then we make use of the file module of Ansible. As the source we give it the
path to our _init.vim_ file. As the path we give it the destination. As the
desired state we want to have a link between the source and path.

Executing the playbook again, will now also create the symlink and nvim should
now have the settings you normally use. When you do changes to your config and
the ansible project is checked into git, you can now automatically sync these
changes with your other machines. On the other machines you just clone the
repository, execute ansible once and from then on all the files, which are
symlinked, are synced automatically. You only need to execute Ansible again, if
you add new software, which needs to be synced as well between your machines.

Of course there are also loops to symlink more than one file and directory. You
can look it up in my [current nvim
playbook](https://github.com/snowiow/snow/blob/master/roles/nvim/tasks/config.yml).
I also have a lot of other parts automated, like downloading a vim package
manager and downloading all the defined packages from my _init.vim_. I won't
cover everything here, because this should only be a small overview of how I
handle my system setup. If you are curios, you can check my [ansible dotfiles
repository](https://github.com/snowiow/snow) out and look around yourself. You
now should be able to read and understand everything in this repository because
the concepts, described before are repeated over and over again.

# Handle different kinds of systems

In this last part I want to present how I use one role for different systems.
The most common example I ran into was Pacman requiring root and homebrew
denying being executed as root.

For this case I created two files _install_dawin.yml_ and _install_linux.yml_
in which I defined the different instructions for installing neovim on Linux
and on Mac OSX. My Linux version looks like the _main.yml_ from before and my
Mac Version looks like this:

```yaml
- name: install neovim on darwin
  homebrew:
    name: neovim
    state: present

- name: install python-neovim on darwin
  pip:
    name: neovim
```

As you can see I need to get python-neovim from pip this time, because it isn't
available in homebrew. But even big differences like these are easy to handle
with splitting some blocks in OS specific files.

The `main.yml` of the role got changed to this:

```yaml
- import_tasks: install_darwin.yml
  when: ansible_facts['os_family'] == "Darwin"
- import_tasks: install_linux.yml
  when: ansible_facts['os_family'] == "ArchLinux"
- import_tasks: config.yml
```

Here I import the install tasks based on the OS family. Ansible collects some
facts about the system, it's running on in a dictionary. This can be accessed
like in the code snippet above. Afterwards I import the config task, which
executes everything to configure neovim to my liking. The configuration is
independent of the underlying OS and can be executed in any case.

# Conclusion

First of all these are the basics of some of my system setup. There is a lot
more stuff to discover. But with the things I have shown you, it
should be easy to pick up for your dotfiles as well.

Also big thanks to [Greg Hurrel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=__0Dquj7y9g)
from whom I got the base idea of using Ansible for my system setup. Also [his
dotfiles](https://github.com/wincent/wincent) are a lot more sophisticated than
mine. Definitely take a look at those as well. I use it time and time again to
look up stuff and use them in my dotfiles. However I think it's important to
start like described in this post, to really create your own spin of an Ansible
dotfiles repository. It's totally okay to copy over things, but I think you
shouldn't start with mine or his dotfiles as a basis, because this will force
you in a corner, which maybe isn't the way you wanted to originally design your
dotfiles repository.

I download Ansible from the package manager of my OS, clone the repository and
execute the `install` shell script. I decided not to pull in Ansible as a third
party dependency in the repository because:

1. It's basically available on any systems package manager anyway and therefore
   easy to install
2. You depend again on other python dependencies, which are needed by Ansible

Especially reason 2 is very problematic, because if you use the universal way of
installing python packages via pip, you get problems with your systems package
manager. If other installed packages have the same dependencies as Ansible does,
your Package manager won't notice that the dependency was already installed
there via pip and will fail while trying to override the files. Trying to solve
this issue by using virtual environments brought even more problems to the
table, because I needed even more dependencies. That's why I went with just
doing

```sh
sudo pacman -S ansible
```

or

```sh
brew install ansible
```

instead of pulling the whole dependency hell into my dotfiles repository.

The last thing I want to mention is that this is only one way of managing system
setup/dotfiles. If you just want to symlink your stuff and nothing else, most
probably then this isn't worth the effort. However if you also want to automate
other stuff of your system setup and aren't comfortable with one of the many
options out there, you should definitely give Ansible a chance. It's very easy
to pick up and thanks to the documentation it's easy to discover new things
fast. Also creating something like this (which has a practical use case for
almost all of us) gives you a good practical entry point in how to use Ansible
and gives you the knowledge to dig deeper and do even more with it. Ansible
today is still a very needed skill in the DevOps space.

Thanks for reading. I'm happy to hear your approaches for your system setup or
how you handle specific things with Ansible.


